---
template: BlogPost
path: /thoughts-on-activity-tracking
date: 2020-09-01T13:46:34.390Z
title: Browser Cookies and Privacy
metaDescription: Is online activity a privacy threat?
thumbnail: /assets/laptop-on-table.png
---
The online advertising market has been booming since the internet was created. Facebook and Google turned into giant tech companies that heavily rely on advertising revenue. There is no doubt that those companies created a more convenient environment for businesses to reach their potential clients. However, there is a legitimate concern over consumer privacy and tracking. If you ever visited an online store, the chances that you will be haunted by ads on similar items on other websites are very high. The thing is that Facebook and Google track your activity on the web even when you are not on their platform. They further use this data collected from unaware users to target ads. Those practices pose a threat to privacy because they lack transparency and are not under legal regulation. Our privacy must be legally protected and companies should refrain from tracking our activity on the web unless consent is given.

The technology that allows websites to track their users was introduced in 1994, 4 years after the first web browser was invented. It was called a cookie and was just a piece of code that let websites remember you. Cookies made our online experience more convenient. Imagine that every time you go to LinkedIn, you have to log in again and again, well - cookies solved that problem. As the online advertising market was growing, platforms with audiences and brands with products to sell were incentivized to team up. They try to collect more information about their users and share it with each other to make targeted ads possible. One way they do this is installing third-party tracking cookies owned by ad selling companies. Google and Facebook are the biggest companies among them, which lets them collect huge amounts of behavioral information. One study analyzed the top one million websites for tracking cookies and the results were astonishing. Google trackers were found in more than 80% of those websites, and Facebook trackers were in 30% of websites respectively. The fact that these companies have so much data on their hands raises concerns about privacy implications.

Google, for example, can derive useful information including but not limited to users’ interests and social identities. Tech giant also states that it “may share non-personally identifiable information publicly and with their partners - like publishers, advertisers, developers, or rights holders”. This unregulated access to private information results in unethical and harmful practices. Advertisers exploit our data to discriminate against consumers to maximize revenue. It was found that major US companies were offering less deals online to low-income communities because those areas had less retail stores to compete with. Another major incident in 2011 was directly linked with Google. It has paid $500 million to the federal government for “allowing illegal pharmacies to target users on its search engine”. Desperately ill individuals were sold illegal steroids and fake prescriptions. It is important to point out that Google settled the issue only after intense investigation from the government. It is distressing to know that tracking data can be exploited against socially or economically vulnerable groups and be possibly left undetected. Tracking technology poses a threat as it can amplify existing racial or social discrimination and be used to economically benefit companies.

Google and Facebook make a lot of money out of our personal information. Just in 2019, they were estimated to hold 50% of worldwide ad spending with combined $171.1 billion in net revenue. They are incentivized to protect their money-generating ad machine by making it as hard as possible for general users to protect their privacy rights. These companies are too big to legally fight against on an individual level. Thus, Google and Facebook must be regulated by appropriate national legislative actions. Otherwise, they will keep finding new sneaky legal practices to continue tracking our activity. If we take a look at Google’s 2019 privacy policy, it had a whopping 4000 words, compared to their initial policy of 600 words in 1999. According to the latest privacy policy, “\[Google] will share personal information outside of Google when we \[company] have your consent”. But Google’s definition of user consent stays vastly vague. Latest revision of their privacy policy did not include any information on where or how we give consent to Google. However, when you upload or give any content to Google, you automatically give them permission to use it through their license. But “this license doesn’t affect your privacy rights”, states the company in the other section. It seems like their privacy policy was not meant to inform us, but to protect Google itself. This terribly complex policy does not act in favor of protecting users' privacy. Legal enforcements are the only way to make these big companies comply with personal privacy standards.

A great example of appropriate actions against privacy violations threats was made by European Union in 2018. According to the law, websites should ask for user’s consent to use tracking cookies. Google then adjusted their policy to meet the EU’s strict regulations. Rewritten privacy policy gave “users more control and ownership over their data . . . \[and] added nine mentions that users could export data and numerous sections explaining how to delete data”. Their approach to protect collective privacy added more transparency on how data is being used. Though it did not revolutionary change what Google does, it sure did give users more rights on their private data. It was the first step towards protecting users’ privacy and forcing companies to be more responsible with your data.

Internet cookies made our online world possible. They allowed companies like Google and Facebook to provide personalized online experience for us. But monetary incentives of corporate actors, turned these companies into money-making machines. And as long as these companies earn money by selling ads, they will be motivated to share users’ private data with each other. They will advance their legal practices to make complex privacy policies that merely inform users. If these practices are left unregulated, it may result in harmful or discriminatory consequences that we might never know. That is why it is important to implement proper legal actions to protect collective privacy. Otherwise, companies like Google and Facebook will continue to exploit our personal data to economically benefit from it
